# Phone Party Games
**Party Dev Squad**
 - Howard Choi
 - Jerry Duncan
 - Cameron O'Neil
 - Preston Provins

## Introduction
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our project idea is to create a browser based client-server game-system that will allow us to implement different party games, both ones we create and reimplement from other sources. Similar in style to Jackbox Party Pack Games but without the need for a centralized device to host images and videos.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The inspiration for our project comes from a lack of easily accessible party games in the market coupled with our enjoyment of phone games. We would like to contribute our own ideas and create new phone games for people everywhere to enjoy as well as implement already existing games in a format friendly to people other than your typical technically inclined user (i.e. parents, families, etc.).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In terms of the market, our idea is not completely novel as there are other implementations of similar products; however, while we may not be the only phone game creators, there are only a handful of other groups that have created something similar. While it will be similar to existing products, we believe that we can bring new, interesting phone games to the market as well as having more games to play than other, similar platforms.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jerry has a history of playtesting board games as well as designing them and has some basic Javascript skills. Howard has some previous experience in web development. Preston is an experienced programmer in fields involving GUI, rendering methods and graphical algorithm based optimizations - he has made several Python and C++ applications dependant upon GUI and on-screen rendering. Cameron has made a few single player and online multiplayer games in Java. All of us are very familiar with C and C++ and feel confident enough in our abilities to transfer those skills to this project.

## Customer Need 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The idea to use smartphones to create a way for people to collaborate or interact with each through a central website has been attempted before. One of the earlier attempts is a website called http://spyfall.crabhat.com/. Spyfall is a website that allows a group of people to use their smartphones to play a game where the players try to guess a secret locations. This website enjoyed a brief window of popularity when it was launched, but soon attention dwindled. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The idea Spyfall is based on has potential, but it needed a focus to be a useful site. https://kahoot.com/ is based on the same idea of smartphone based group activities, yet has a clear goal that separates it from Spyfall. Kahoot focused on using Spyfall’s concepts in an educational setting. Schools, parents, and businesses are now using this website to help teach or train.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The core idea that smartphones can be used to foster communication between people is effective, but it is clear that the idea needs a strong focus to produce results. Education and business have found ways to improve their teaching and training by incorperating Kahoot, but we believe that this idea has greater potential as a social application.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our plan is to use the core idea to help create or sustain a social engagement. A few ideas that are being considered are a website to help organize a party or get together, a drinking game that has interactive content, and a wii sport style collection of games accessible through smartphones.

## Proposed solution
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The issue with trying to play games with friends and family today is that most games have moved away from the old fashioned split screen games and onto online multiplayer games. While sometimes this fixed the issue of not being able to play games without physical company, now there is nothing to do when there is company. In order to play most modern multiplayer games you need a seperate, console, TV setup, and an online monthly paid subscription for each player. One possible solution could be to bring back split screen games, however that is still several hundred dollars to be able to start and what are you to do if there are more than 4 players, as that is where most consoles max out. Nearly everybody today has a smartphone, so why not move the games to that. Our solution is to have a product that allows any number of people to be able to play multiplayer games together without having to buy any extra equipment. The game would not need a console, PC, etc, to run a server for the game as there will be dedicated servers for this product, therefore it can be played anywhere the players have wifi or cell internet service. The players would not even have to be in the same room or even the same country to be able to play together. While this may seem like it partially defeats the purpose of the product there is no reason why the customer should not be able to do it if they so choose (maybe they want to play a game while talking on the phone). The customer does not even need to download an app that will take up space on their phone. All they have to do is go to the website, login, and start a game with their friends. In face since it is completely web based, a phone isn’t actually required. Any device that has a web browser(PC, laptop, tablet, etc) can participate. It is possible that some games may be device specific (for example a game might be optimal with a touch screen device) so any device requirements and recommendations will be listed on each game for the user to easily see and will be able to filter out any games that are not optimal for their device.

## Technology
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Our team plans on using the JavaScript programming language to fully utilize the Meteor framework and API. Meteor is a JavaScript platform that allows for web applications to be built from start to finish in JavaScript. Meteor is also open source as well full stack. The platform would also allow for us to deploy our application to multiple targets at once – a single application in meteor deploys for iOS, Android and Web Browsers simultaneously. Not only does Meteor allow for a complete deployment – it allows for a fast deployment as most applications take minimal amounts of functional code and Meteor itself is open source and extensible for utmost flexibility and rapid development for small teams.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meteor also includes Blaze, a liquid fast renderer. Meteor utilizes **data on the wire** which means that raw data is sent to clients, not HTML. This allows for us to use rendering methods provided by Blaze to render graphical data to the user as fast as possible. Meteor is also full-stack, which means Meteor has **full-stack reactivity** which allows clients to see changes in game state in near real-time.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We will utilize MongoDB as a database system for the application. MongoDB meshes perfectly with JavaScript allowing us to perform queries and aggregate functions in pure JavaScript. Meteor’s full stack capabilities turn MongoDB into a full-fledged live server for our application.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Since our application is not OS dependent we will be building and running from Windows and Mac alike to target web browser on mobile and desktop. As stated previously, this is easily accomplished when utilizing Meteor. The only tools necessary would be any developer’s choice of IDE as well as proper source control and problem tracking. 
